JJ Espinoza (jj.espinoza.la@gmail.com)
Read My Research
Join my 16K Linkedin Followers
Test My AI Software


Summary

Experienced AI leader with a track record of delivering successful projects and increasing client satisfaction. Expertise in AI/ML, data science, and advanced analytics. Led teams in meeting goals, improving collaboration and reducing knowledge silos. Strong background in various industries. Goal is to advance to a Principal Data Scientist/Machine Learning Engineer or Director of Machine Learning role.


Experience


Sr AI Leader/Architect 
Amazon Web Services (AWS)
2020 - Present


Provided strategic guidance and direction to a team of 5+ architects to drive overall consulting efforts, resulting in successful delivery of projects and increased client satisfaction
Developed and executed POCs/MVPs in AI/ML for pre-sales engagements, contributing to $5 million in paid engagements and expansion of the company's client base
Led a team of 10+ leads in meeting and exceeding 115% of publication goals, improving team collaboration and reducing knowledge silos and duplicate effort through effective team management and communication

Technical Lead, Marketing Science 
Facebook
2019 - 2020


Developed a custom data analysis solution utilizing SQL and Python, resulting in a 66% reduction in Toyota's marketing costs per sale through the optimization of marketing campaigns and targeting.
Improved clients' use of Facebook's Advanced Analytics by 26% through expertly leading a team of data scientists in NLP analysis and providing actionable insights for optimization.
Successfully scaled work to 34 customers by creating comprehensive training videos, hosting regular office hours, and maintaining detailed wikis, resulting in increased customer satisfaction and retention.


Director, Machine Learning 
20th Century Fox
2017 - 2019


Led the development of a new AI system, resulting in a 8% increase in studio revenues through improved automation, scalability and efficiency of studio operations.
Implemented and configured a secure and efficient cloud system, resulting in a 3x increase in productivity for data scientists by providing a seamless and fast access to data and tools, and enabling faster data processing and analysis.
Established oneself as a thought leader in the Media and Entertainment Industry by appearing on well-known podcasts, drafting articles in industry publications, and providing expert insights and guidance on the latest trends and technologies in the field.


Director, Data Science 
NBCUniversal
2016 - 2017


Developed and executed a strategy for international movie distribution, resulting in a 18% increase in digital sales through the optimization of distribution channels and the implementation of targeted marketing campaigns.
Utilized Econometrics to quantify the impact of anti-piracy efforts and demonstrated a five times return on investment, by providing actionable insights and recommendations to stakeholders on the most effective ways to combat piracy.
Provided coaching and mentorship to team members, resulting in multiple promotions and skill development, through regular performance evaluations, one-on-one meetings, and providing opportunities for professional growth and development.


Director, Data Science 
Disney
2012 - 2015



The Walt Disney Company 
Led the maintenance and improvement of the in-house Marketing Mix Model for ABC Television, resulting in a 21% increase in Marketing ROI by optimizing marketing strategies, and providing actionable insights to stakeholders.
Developed and implemented a new marketing model to better understand how audiences interact with ads online, resulting in a 13% gain in ad performance by leveraging advanced analytics techniques and providing actionable insights on audience behavior.
Established oneself as a thought leader in the field by presenting at UCLA and industry conferences, contributing to the recruitment of new data scientists by providing expert insights and guidance on the latest trends and technologies in the field.
Data Engineer / Statistical Programmer
Econ One Research                                                                                                                                                         [2011-2012]
Developed and executed an econometric analysis, resulting in the identification of Google's liability for $400 million in punitive damages through the application of advanced statistical techniques and the analysis of large datasets.
Demonstrated expertise as a SAS programmer working with large datasets, in collaboration with economists, to produce evidence in legal cases by leveraging technical skills and knowledge to provide actionable insights and support legal strategies
Data Analyst
Verifi Inc.                                                                                                                                                                          [2009-2011]
Utilized advanced statistical techniques, such as Bayesian networks, Random Forest, and Machine Learning, to improve the accuracy of credit card fraud detection by up to 90%.
Developed and implemented real-time anomaly detection system for credit card processing data, resulting in a 50% reduction in false positives and a 25% increase in the speed of fraud detection.



Education
Harvard Business School
CSUF
UCLA
UCLA
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Competing in AI
MS Econometrics
BS Mathematics 
BA Economics
Exec Edu - LEAD Program


Certifications & Trainings (see Linkedin)




3x AWS Certified
Cloud Practitioner, Solutions Architect, Machine Learning 
Google Certified in Machine Learning
Advanced Solutions Lab
Data Science on AWS
ML Pipelines with NLP Models 
Data Science Specialist
Johns Hopkins University


Publications, Public Speaking, and Patent


AI Podcast Guest 
This Week in Machine Learning (link)
5+ Artificial Intelligence eBooks
(link)
Patent for Computer Vision Real Estate Investing System
Provisional Patent #62/774,446
University Lecturer & Guest Speaker
USC, UCLA, Harvard, Stanford




Extracurricular Passion Projects
Econometrics Blog
Started in grad school has 440K visitors (link)
AI/ML Real Estate Investing Software
Created and use software to buy investment properties 
JohHunter
Developed tool for efficient Job searching (link)
Building AI/ML APIS for Developers
I build AI/ML APIs (link)




What my peers, direct, reports, and leaders say about me


“As a direct result of his contribution we were able to reprioritize goals based on optimal revenue increase. I highly recommend JJ to drive any machine learning related initiative to success.” - Marketing Science Partner @ Facebook


“Few people have the opportunity to work with someone who is not only a leader, but also someone who is more than willing to be hands-on and execute.” - Lead Manager, Marketing Technology @AT&T


“JJ has in-depth knowledge of statistical modeling and other analytical tools and he genuinely enjoys applying these to solve business problems. JJ is a great team member, collaborator, and a positive presence” - Consulting Director of Data Science, @Disney


“JJ drove several technically rigorous projects to completion that affected business change based on thoughtful messaging strategy” - Director of Analytics @NBCUniversal

More Recommendation on Linkedin

